Hello, this is some text. You can add more lines if needed.

 Additional note goes here.
 
1) Differential Gene Expression Analysis:
Identify genes that are differentially expressed between different experimental conditions (e.g., diseased vs. healthy, treated vs. untreated).
Statistical methods, such as t-tests or fold-change analysis, are commonly used to assess differential expression.
Example: Comparing gene expression in cancerous vs. normal tissue to identify genes that are upregulated or downregulated in cancer.

2) Clustering Analysis:
Cluster genes or samples based on their expression patterns. This can help identify groups of genes that are co-regulated or samples with similar expression profiles.
Hierarchical clustering and k-means clustering are common techniques for this analysis.
Example: Hierarchical clustering of gene expression profiles across multiple tissue samples to identify groups of co-regulated genes.


3) Pathway Analysis:
Determine which biological pathways are significantly affected by changes in gene expression.
Tools like Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) or overrepresentation analysis can be used to identify enriched pathways.
Example: Identifying pathways affected by gene expression changes in response to a drug treatment to understand its mechanism of action.


4) Gene Ontology (GO) Analysis:
Evaluate the functional enrichment of differentially expressed genes in terms of biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions using GO terms.
Example: Analyzing differentially expressed genes in a neurodegenerative disease to determine enrichment in GO terms related to neuron function and synaptic transmission.


5) Network Analysis:
Construct gene co-expression networks to identify relationships between genes based on their expression patterns.
Network analysis tools help visualize and identify key nodes (genes) within the networks.
Example: Constructing a co-expression network of genes implicated in a specific disease and identifying key hub genes that may play crucial roles.


6) Time-Series Analysis:
Analyze gene expression changes over time to understand temporal patterns and dynamics.
Time-series clustering and trajectory analysis are common approaches.
Example: Studying the gene expression changes during the cell cycle to identify genes with periodic patterns of expression.


7) Survival Analysis:
Assess the association between gene expression levels and patient survival outcomes.
Kaplan-Meier survival curves and Cox proportional hazards models are often used for this analysis.
Example: Analyzing the association between the expression of specific genes and the survival outcome of cancer patients to identify potential prognostic markers.


8) Class Prediction/Classification:
Build models to classify samples into predefined groups based on their gene expression profiles.
Machine learning techniques, such as support vector machines or random forests, can be applied for classification.
Example: Building a model to classify tumor samples into different subtypes based on their gene expression profiles for personalized treatment strategies.


9) Normalization and Quality Control:
Correct for technical variations and biases in microarray data using normalization methods.
Perform quality control checks to identify and remove poor-quality samples.
Example: Applying quantile normalization to correct for technical variations in microarray data and removing samples with poor quality based on quality control metrics.


10) Integration with other omics data:
Combine microarray data with other types of omics data (e.g., genomics, proteomics) to gain a more comprehensive understanding of biological processes.
Example: Integrating microarray gene expression data with genomic mutation data to identify genes that are both differentially expressed and mutated in cancer.


Using the boxplot function we can plot the matrix by column, every column will be used as input
for a single boxplot. This allows us to compare the different samples. We need to set 2 additional
parameters to the function, so that the labels end up being readable in the plot:

boxplot(variable, las = 2, cex.axis = 0.7)


Before we can start normalisation, we need to log2 transform the data using the following
command:

microarrayLOG <- apply(microarray, 2, log2)


To normalize we are going to use an external package called preprocessCore, you can install
packages into R by using the install.packages command, or using the menu: Packages / Pakete,
Install packages / Installiere Paket(e). Select the preprocessCore package and install it into R.
After installation we need to load the package (so that we can use the functions) by issueing the
command:

library(preprocessCore)
 Normalize your data using the normalize.quantiles function, and store the results in a new
variable called microarrayLOGQnorm. The new matrix created doesn’t have the rownames and
column names from the original matrix, but we can add them using the following commands:

colnames(microarrayLOGQnorm) <- colnames(microarrayLOG)
rownames(microarrayLOGQnorm) <- rownames(microarrayLOG)

After adding back the row and column names create another boxplot of the new variable microarrayLOGQnorm.


Additional

If we want to analyse the data we are perhaps interested in the groups that might be in the data.
Since I downloaded this dataset without downloading the sample information, we don’t know if
there are ay groups in the data. However we can find out these groups by doing clustering.

The following code will first flip the rows and columns this function is called t() from translate.
Then it will use the dist() function to create a distance matrix between samples. Finally we use
hclust() function to cluster the distance matrix. NOTE all operations are applied to the variable,
so when we want to reconstruct what happens we read from the inside out

clusters <- hclust(dist(t(microarrayLOGQnorm)))
plot(clusters)


Because we don’t know the grouping of the samples we cannot look at differential expression
(e.g. which genes are up in group1 versus down in group2). However we can see which genes
are the most variable in the experiment, which might give us some biological insight into which
genes are the most active. To calculate the most variable genes, we can use the var (variance)
function. However because some genes are highly expressed, while others are low we need to
compensate for that using the mean of the expression

scaledVariation <- apply(microarrayLOGQnorm,1,function(x){
    var(x)/mean(x)
})

When we plot this scaledVariation, we can see that there are some genes which are highly
variable. When scaledVariance is higher then 1, this means that the variation is bigger then the
mean, we can use the which function to select those genes, and use the names function to get
their names:

highlyVariable <- names(which(scaledVariation > 1))

We can now make a heatmap using only these probes:

heatmap(microarrayLOGQnorm[highlyVariable,], cexRow = 0.7, cexCol=0.7)



